Multimodal dataset builder + docs (#1667)
pytorch/torchtune: docs/source/basics/multimodal_datasets.rst

.. _multimodal_dataset_usage_label:

===================
Multimodal Datasets
===================

> Multimodal datasets include both text and image data used to train VLMs. torchtune currently supports multimodal chat datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multimodal datasets include more than one data modality, e.g. text + image + speech, and can be used to train transformers. Torchtune currently only supports multimodal chat datasets for Vision-Language Models (VLMs).
```

The primary entry point for fine-tuning with multimodal datasets in torchtune is the :func:`~torchtune.datasets.multimodal.multimodal_chat_dataset`
builder. This lets you specify a local or Hugging Face dataset that follows the multimodal chat data format
directly from the config and train your VLM on it.

.. _example_multimodal:

Example multimodal dataset
--------------------------

> Here is an example of a multimodal chat dataset for a visual question-answering task.

Reviewer: I would add something like: "Notice how <image> is a place holder for the file provided in image_path, so we can know where to insert the image tokens".

I also think that the example should contain more than one image, so people know how to gerenalize it.

        max_seq_len=8192,
        tile_size=224,
        patch_size=14,
    )
    ds = multimodal_chat_dataset(
        model_transform=model_transform,
        source="json",
        data_files="data/my_data.json",
        column_map={
            "dialogue": "conversations",
            "image_path": "image",
        },
        image_dir="/home/user/dataset/",  # /home/user/dataset/images/clock.jpg
        image_tag="<image>",
        split="train",
    )
    tokenized_dict = ds[0]
    print(transform.decode(tokenized_dict["tokens"], skip_special_tokens=False))
    # '<|begin_of_text|><|start_header_id|>user<|end_header_id|>\n\nQuestion:<|image|>What time is it on the clock?Answer:<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>assistant<|end_header_id|>\n\nIt is 10:00AM.<|eot_id|>'
    print(tokenized_dict["encoder_input"]["images"][0].shape)  # (num_tiles, num_channels, tile_height, tile_width)
    # torch.Size([4, 3, 224, 224])

.. code-block:: yaml

    # In config
    model_transform:
      _component_: torchtune.models.flamingo
      path: /tmp/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct/original/tokenizer.model
      prompt_template: torchtune.data.QuestionAnswerTemplate

>       max_seq_len: 8192

Reviewer: oh, this is confusing, because in every other config, this is done in the tokenizer. Maybe we should explicitly say that model_transform takes the place of the tokenizer. A better solution might be to rename every config.tokenizer as model_transform, but i am not sure if i even like it.

Reviewer: dumb question: Why wouldnt "FlamingoTransform" just be "FlamingoTokenizer"? we are tokenizing now images and text

    dataset:
      _component_: torchtune.datasets.multimodal.multimodal_chat_dataset
      source: json

>       data_files: data/my_data.json

Reviewer: can we add a dummy 2-example-file of what my_data.json should look like

Author: that's shown above?

      split: train
      column_map:
        dialogue: conversations
        image_path: image
      image_dir: /home/user/dataset/

>       image_tag: "<image>"

Reviewer: noob question: will this ever break if the user adds <image> to their prompt, or <image> is a special token and the tokenizer understands if it comes from the user or the ChatML?

Author: yes it will leade to unexpected behaviors, the burden is on the user for setting this correctly.. I don't know if there's an easy way to check for those edge cases.

      split: train

Multimodal dataset format
-------------------------

Multimodal datasets are currently expected to follow the :ref:`sharegpt` chat format, where the image paths are in one column
and the user-assistant conversations are in another column.

.. code-block:: text

    |  conversations                     | image        |
    |------------------------------------|--------------|
    | [{"from": "human", "value": "Q1"}, | images/1.jpg |
    |  {"from": "gpt", "value": "A1"}]   |              |

> As an example, you can see the schema of the `ShareGPT4V dataset <https://huggingface.co/datasets/Lin-Chen/ShareGPT4V>`_.

Reviewer: it seems that it forces single image per row, is that right? If so, can we make it explicit that this is a constraint of this format? Otherwise, can we add an example with more than 1 image?

Author: yes, will state that it's constrained to single image per row for now

Loading multimodal datasets from Hugging Face
---------------------------------------------

You simply need to pass in the dataset repo name to ``source``, which is then passed into Hugging Face's ``load_dataset``.

> For most datasets, you will also need to specify the ``split`` and/or the subset via ``name``.

Reviewer: nice! super useful!

            {
                "from": "human",
                "value": "What time is it on the clock?",
            },
            {
                "from": "gpt",
                "value": "It is 10:00 AM.",
            },
        ],
        "image": "images/clock.jpg",
    }
    image_dir = "/home/user/dataset/"
    pil_image = load_image(Path(image_dir) / Path(sample["image"]))
    print(pil_image)
    # <PIL.Image.Image>

Then, you can add the PIL image directly to the content of the related message. Only PIL images are supported as image content
in :class:`~torchtune.data.Message`, not image paths or urls.

.. code-block:: python

    from torchtune.data import Message

    user_message = None
    for msg in sample["conversations"]:
        if msg["from"] == "human":
            user_message = Message(
                role="user",
                content=[
                    {"type": "image", "content": pil_image},
                    {"type": "text", "content": msg["value"]},
                ]
            )
    print(user_message.contains_media)
    # True
    print(user_message.get_media())
    # [<PIL.Image.Image>]
    print(user_message.text_content)

>     # What time is it on the clock?

Reviewer: very nice!
